---
title: Upgrade Guide
description: Overview of breaking changes and upgrade instructions for xbat
---

::Headline

## Upgrading to v2.0.0

::

The v2.0.0 release of xbat includes several breaking changes and improvements. Please follow the instructions below to ensure a smooth upgrade process.

::Headline

### Configuration Changes

::

Several changes were made to the `xbat.conf` configuration file structure and required parameters. Please compare your configuration with the new [xbat.conf](https://github.com/MEGWARE-HPC/xbat/blob/master/conf/xbat.conf) and update your settings accordingly.

::banner{type="hint"}
Use the `./setup.sh validate` command to check for any issues with your configuration (see [Validating xbat Configuration](/docs/admin/setup/installation#validating-xbat-configuration)).
::

Starting from v2.0.0, the `xbatd.conf` can be automatically based on the `xbat.conf` (see [Configuration for xbatd](/docs/admin/setup/xbatd#configuration-for-xbatd)).

::banner{type="warning"}
Versions of xbatd prior to v2.0.0 are not compatible with xbat v2.0.0. Make sure to update the xbatd rpm as well as the `xbatd.conf` on all nodes to avoid any issues with data collection.
::

::Headline

### Database Changes

::

::Headline

### MongoDB

::

TODO

::Headline

### QuestDB

::

With xbat v2.0.0, the time series database QuestDB has been replaced with ClickHouse. This change does improve the storage efficiency and now allows for deletion of measurements without requiring a dedicated QuestDB purge.

If you want to preserve your existing data, this change requires migrating your existing data from QuestDB to ClickHouse. The only supported way of performing this is via the Export/Import functionality of xbat. Prior to upgrading to v2.0.0, export your existing benchmarks via the UI or the REST-API. Perform the upgrade to v2.0.0 and then import the previously exported data.
