---
title: User Management
description: Authentication Providers and User Management
---

::Banner{type="info"}
Only privileged users can access the user management.
::

User management of xbat is powered by seamless integration with existing user management systems (UMS). Currently, LDAP, IPA and PAM are supported. Users are only imported from the UMS upon their first successful login into xbat and are not visible beforehand. Users are synchronised with the UMS on every login attempt.

::Headline

## Connecting to a User Management System

::

To connect xbat to a UMS, you need to specify the provider and additional settings in the `xbat.conf` configuration file in the `[authentication]` section.

::codeblock

```ini
...
[authentication]
# Authentication provider [pam|ipa|ldap]
provider = pam
## Server address for external authentication (ignored for pam)
# Examples:
# LDAP ldap://ldap.forumsys.com:389
# IPA demo1.freeipa.org
address =

# [LDAP only]
basedn = ou=users,dc=example,dc=com
# cn or uid
user_identifier = cn

# [IPA only] Enable/Disable SSL Verification
verify_ssl = false
```

::

::Headline

## Access Control

::

By default, all active users of the UMS are able to access xbat. If you want to limit access, you may enable the `Whitelist` feature and specify all whitelisted users manually.

::Banner{type="warning"}
Make sure to not lock yourself out by enabling the `Whitelist` feature without adding your own user.
The `admin` account is not affected by the whitelist and can always access xbat.
::

Additionally, users that are already registered with xbat can be blocked via the web interface. This will revoke their access tokens and prevent them from logging in again.

::Headline

## Roles

::

There are five different roles for users in xbat:

-   **Demo**: View configurations, benchmarks, users and projects
-   **Guest**: View configurations and benchmarks
-   **User**: Edit configurations and launch benchmarks, delete own benchmarks and configurations
-   **Manager**: Edit configurations, launch benchmarks, delete benchmarks and configurations of other users, manage users and projects
-   **Admin**: Full access but not allowed to launch benchmarks

::Banner{type="hint"}
Manager and Admin roles can view, modify and delete all configurations and benchmarks, regardless of whether they are shared or not.
::
